so I was a little bit surprised to get
berries email asking if I would like to
speak at this festival because I never
thought I'd have the opportunity to
speak at an arts festival so that's my
long-winded way of saying is this is a
new audience for me and initially I
thought okay liz is great i have this
material i've been presenting to all
sorts of different audiences now i can
present it to yet another audience and i
thought that would be the sort of the
extent of the newness of it but
something interesting has happened in
the presentations that i caught
yesterday and those today is that
typically at a conference I'm I'm
desperately trying to remember parts of
the previous presentation so that I can
try to make my material irrelevant and
reference back to it and i found the
presentations that i've seen here
actually changing my talk in my head and
so the the images are fixed because
they're in a PowerPoint but some of the
language around them is going to change
by virtue of what I've already heard
here today so I my closest experience to
this would have been my first
presentation that collards Arts
Association and Dallas back in two
thousand seven or something like that
and interesting experience there was
that I I was it was a panel on losing of
art primarily looking at art looted
during world war two and I thought great
this is an opportunity to start
presenting my material and I was very
excited and then at the last moment
College Art Association is a huge
conference if you don't know and I Yoko
Ono made a made a surprise visit and
scheduled to talk at the same time that
my panel supposed to take place so I
don't know whether the sparse audience
was the result of that or just the
newness of the concept but in any case
I'm glad to see such a full room here
today alright I'm going to be speaking
about cultural security or at least what
I call cultural security
so one of my objectives is to give you a
sense of what is meant by that in
general and what I mean by it and then
how it relates to the theme that Barry
presented and then talk about what
technology can do not only to inform us
about cultural security in the present
but how it can add maybe a predictive
aspect to it all right what is cultural
security okay it's a phrase it I didn't
make it up it although I did start using
it before I knew about other references
to it but when I use the Google Ngram
viewer I realized that it's been used
before and so it looks like it started
maybe in the 1930s and and then
continued to have some popularity but
then dropped off a little bit in the
1950s and all of a sudden sprung back to
life and as you can see the curve going
pretty steadily upwards and what's
interesting about this curve to me and I
haven't studied this in depth but in
1954 there was a landmark International
Convention was passed called the The
Hague Convention for the protection of
cultural property during armed conflict
and it was motivated by the large-scale
destruction and looting that occurred
during World War two and if you look at
this graph it appears as though ever
since that time point the the phrase has
increasingly been used with more
frequency across literature so in what
context is cultural security used so
there's this notion that it's it's about
protecting indigenous people's culture
and then there's another notion that
it's it's used to protect what's thought
of as being national culture and in fact
a China and their recent national
security law has a section on cultural
security and it's interesting there how
that's used in political rhetoric and it
and how it can be abused in some ways as
well I look at I look at it in a very
international sense and thinking about
what is the relationship between culture
and international
fares are more specifically
international security so I guess when
answer the question is what is cultural
security it depends on perspective you
can think of it as a nation being
concerned about the culture of
indigenous peoples and trying to protect
as much as possible preserve that that
indigenous culture from from the
influences of an industrialized society
national cultural security can be
thought of in terms of a nation trying
to mediate the effects of international
influence on on that culture and what
are these influences why I'm going to
very broadly refer to them in terms of
politics economics and security and what
I'm going to be speaking about today is
the way in which these three dimensions
are these three sort of operators in in
world power what role culture plays in
each one of them so I I should I'll take
a step back here and is very already
mentioned my background isn't actually
in it's not in a heart history it's not
in political science it's not in
security studies my background is in
software engineering and and
neuroscience and ironically even though
this conference is about looking at
technology and relationship to art I
actually started looking at this to get
away from technology and and and here's
what happened so as a scientist I tend
to look at things that I can measure so
I thought okay well culture is pretty
amorphous in some ways what what is
tangible what can be measured so I
quickly rabbit ated towards cultural
property as a representation of culture
and so the images that I that I have up
on the screen are are representations of
those three dimensions that I mentioned
and the way in which cultural property
plays a role in each and each one of
them so of course there's the global art
market and what's interesting about this
graphic is that it shows China as having
a larger percentage of the global art
market then I the United States United
Kingdom I I took I took these numbers in
2011 it might have changed since but the
point is that
that the China has emerged as a very
significant component the art market and
not only that when you look at the
relationship of their percentage
relative to their GDP it becomes even
more striking that's the figure to the
right of that is an image of stays on
the card players and not only does the
image of poker playing I have some some
relationship or some similarities to
international politics or foreign
relations but this this painting also
set a world record being purchased for
250 million dollars by the role of
family of Qatar so here you have an Arab
nation buying a Western work of art and
paying a premium for it which is also
interesting from an international
relations standpoint and the lower image
represents the security aspect of
international affairs it's an image some
of you have a familiar with it it shows
the demolition of one of the giant
statues of Buddha and the Bamiyan value
of Afghanistan by the Taliban in 2001
and so what's what's interesting about
this a tragic event is that it was an
act of terror but there wasn't any
intent for loss of life I'm not sure if
anybody was hurt in the process of
blowing up the Buddha's but i I don't I
don't think that that was the intent it
was purely symbolic to to draw attention
to their cause so within within the
three dimensions of economics politics
and insecurity cultural property is
represented by the art market cultural
property is what I refer to art in the
world of political science and then our
crime is an example of the role that
culture plays and insecurity so I looked
at each one of these from a historical
standpoint and also looking forward from
2001 onwards which is when I started
doing this research and I was I didn't
only look at at the role that culture
plays and security with eat within each
one of these dimensions and isolation I
also looked at how there's an
interaction between them so for example
as the value of art increases in the art
market it perhaps takes on greater
political significance or there's more
interested from a loop
standpoint also as artworks become more
more valuable financially it motivates
our crime a correspondingly as as
artworks take on political significance
that might increase their market value
and it makes it makes monuments and so
forth more attractive as targets for
political destruction or political
violence and correspondingly forgeries
and and our can influence the art market
and vandalism can motivate the
development of protocols for the
protection of art so all of these three
dimensions interact and having as in
fact increased over the last 15 years to
integrate them even more so I'm going to
very quickly go through the tell-tale
signs that each one of these has
increased in in magnitude say since
World War two I already I give you some
some insight into the relative market
values so that the art market itself has
developed dramatically since world war
two and one way of indicating that is is
just by the the peak prices that are
paid for our works so the two images
that are shown here the one on the left
is I think it's number five by Jackson
Pollock and it's sold in 2006 for 140
million dollars for a single painting
and that set the record at the time and
it ended and it eclipsed the previous
record and then I already mentioned that
shortly after that the the image on the
right was purchased for 250 million
dollars but but those are prices simply
of her private sales at auction which
tend to be lower records are also being
set the image on the left is by Picasso
and it previously held the record as
having broken the 100 million dollar
mark the image on the right is Edward
mullock's The Scream which sold i think
it was in in two thousand i want to say
2013 for 4 120 million dollars so it's
it clearly the art market has been
expanding quite a bit but this isn't
just the case in
Western art looking at artworks
developed by Chinese artists in fact
contemporaries of Picasso not only have
been a you know increasing their there a
presence in the art market but in 2011
the artist is depicted here who is a
contemporary Picasso the sale of his
works actually surpassed that of the
cost in other words the turnover the
dollar amount of the turnover was
greater than that Picasso and Picasso's
works had been held as sort of a
benchmark for forum the value of
artworks and so perhaps that gives
Picasso a little bit a little bit
concern here all right so another
example of of the way in which the art
market has been developing its by
comparing it to typical investment
instruments of here this graph shows
that and this is based on the my Moses
index that carefully tracks it's almost
like a standard & poor's 500 of
well-known artwork so i can compare
resale value of the artworks and here it
shows that that the the my Moses index
seems to track the standard & poor's 500
index quite well and in fact post-war r
would represent by the blue line looks
like it might even be doing a little bit
better than the standard & poor's 500
index so the the popularity of art as an
investment and not just a matter of
connoisseurship has demonstrated by
indices that look at individual artists
such as damien hirst and tracks their
performance relative to the standard
poor's 500 index so moving on to
political science I already gave you
some background on that on a painting
but moving away from from the art market
one way in which art has become has
developed a great deal practical value
in foreign relations is the restitution
of objects and so in in 2005-2006
through our landmark cases where Italy
and Greece challenged prominent museums
the United States whether or not the
objects are the the antiquities in their
possession had a legitimate provenance
and this
this gold funeral wreath represented
here was returned by the Getty to to
Italy in 2006 the you refer Nia's crater
from the Mets to Italy as well other
museums the cleveland museum of art was
a coalesced and returned objects because
it was the provo dances were in question
and it's not just restricted to movable
objects there's this is an image of the
axon obelisk from Ethiopia which was
removed by Italy I believe in the 1930s
and after World War Two Italy signed an
agreement to return the obelisk in 1947
didn't get around to it until two
thousand three which which timing is
pretty interesting there so they
returned this in 2003 and the 2005-2006
they ask for things to come back so you
can you can you're getting a sense of
the political nature of this it isn't
returns aren't just based on whether or
not the provenance is in question this
is an image of Machu Picchu in Peru
where artifacts were excavated legally
between an agreement between the United
States and improving our geologists and
as part of the agreement some of the
artifacts went back to and ended up in
the Peabody Museum at Yale this was at
the beginning of the 1900s for a while
Peru head and lobbying for the return of
the objects and in 2010 succeeded in in
in achieving a memorandum of
understanding for the objects to come
back it isn't necessarily objects that
are simply within the confines of a
nation's border this this image is a
Socratic figure that was turkey was
laying claim to this having it returned
I think it was from the Cleveland Museum
of Art simply because it was discovered
somewhere in within the within the reach
of the Ottoman Empire not necessarily
where turkey is today I it isn't
restricted to items going from from
institutions vaccinations this is an
image of one of the paintings by Gustav
Klimt that was returned from a National
Museum in Austria to a private
individual in Los Angeles California
Maria Altmann because it was it was done
rated at the artworks were not
necessarily acquired legitimately and
then finally I it's it's not just
nations asking for return from
institutions or things or I was going
back to private individuals it's auction
houses as well this is an image of a of
a statue that was it was originally from
Cambodia and when the Cambodian
Authority saw this on the cover of a
Sotheby's auction catalog they said wait
a second I think that was taken from our
country illegally and it turns out that
in the end the Department of Justice and
US Attorney's you know cooperated with
the Cambodian government to investigate
the case and the statute was in fact
returned so these this movement of of
wartime looting or illicit Lee acquired
objects returning to their countries of
origin or simply because objects are
were originally from one place and the
nation saying this really belongs back
to where it was was created that might
inspire other nations to pursue the same
course of action the Benin bronzes may
return to some of them have returned to
Nigeria and may continue to return and
then I what I haven't mentioned yet
which it's almost a metaphor for the
question of restitution are the
parthenon marbles which were taken at
the beach i were to removed from from
the Parthenon in Athens at the beginning
of the 1800s and greases lobbied for the
return of these of these artifacts to
come back to Greece and what's
interesting it was always thought that
if if the the so-called Elgin marbles
were ever to return to Greece it would
have a domino effect and then every
every item that was ever removed from a
country under any circumstances would
end up going back and butt British
Museum is hanging tough they still have
the Elgin marbles and it may turn out
that the elegant Elgin marbles are in
fact the last item to ever go back so
now moving on to security I already
talked about this image a little bit
this took place in enough
aniston in in 2001 Iraq 2003 looting
that happened during during and after in
the chaos after conflict this is an
image satellite image of looting
occurring across Iraq there was a
professor I think New York University of
Stony Brook that that had this idea that
okay well if we if we look at
time-lapsed images satellite images we
can actually see where looting is
happening and expanding over time so
that was instrumental to realize what
the problem was and then our crime has
has been flourishing over the last
decade and a half and it these when I
say that I mean so fine works are works
of fine art being taken from museum and
and in private collections so what what
these were these art crimes in general
that I'm calling them has motivated some
response so for example after the
diluting in Iraq in 2003 the FBI form
the Art Crime Team which was formed in
part to retrieve some of the items that
were that were taken from from Iraq
during that time and subsequently the
Art Crime Team has involved has been
involved in retrieving other objects
such as this painting with collaboration
with the police in Madrid to retrieve
items that were stolen from a from a
residence and artworks are also found in
conjunction with other major crimes so
for example this image by mitsui was was
stolen from an estate in Ireland it was
discovered in in Istanbul I believe when
there was a bust on on on a harrowing
heroin trade that was going down and it
was seen it was realized this painting
was being used as collateral in the drug
deal so it's it's pretty clear that that
there's that that art is no longer
simply a victim of conflict in other
words it isn't an afterthought you know
conquest happens
looting and plunders happen dr. conquest
it's it's much more tightly integrated
with not only with armed conflict but
with with with crime and so it doesn't
it isn't necessarily constricted to
wartime is happening in peacetime as
well this integration of our crime with
what we considered more more serious
crimes so I'll leave it at that for now
and I'll move on so where does
technology fit into all this so again as
a scientist I'm i'm all about data
collection and so one one approach to
understanding the art market better so
the market for fine art if you will is
track quite closely and as i pointed out
there's indices that the track the value
of the artworks not so much for the
antiquities market and so this becomes a
problem when when there's all this
there's all this curiosity about you
know whether or not dash or the Islamic
state is is using the antiquities market
to finance their operations and then
they're they're all sorts of wild
estimates on what the sides the end the
illicit antiquities market is well I'm
not sure that there's even a notion of
what the listed market in antiquities is
it with so in 2009 I I started looking
at data from Sotheby's and this is what
I came up with and technology fits into
this because I did some screen scraping
on the Sotheby's auction auction sites
to actually retrieve the data and so
that the image on the upper left breaks
down antiquities into into different
categories these are categories that
that Sotheby's provides so it makes it
easy to collect the data in that way and
by looking at at this type of an image
you can see a trend emerging so what's
interesting here is that is that African
tribal art has had the during over that
time period had the had the most steady
increase and in fact surpassed all the
other are types of artworks and
financial volume so that that motivates
a little bit closer inspection of it is
it just the prices or is it
volume or what's going on so a little
bit closer analysis shows that it's both
represented by the red line the size of
the spheres or is the volume of objects
traded and the and the height of the
sphere along the y-axis is the is the
price so again the trend persists so
let's look a little bit more closely at
African tribal art and so now breaking
it down by different regions in Africa
you know one one stands out here in
particular and it's not the black line
at the top it's the it's the gray dotted
line that actually has an upturn between
two thousand eight and two thousand nine
which is when the economic crisis
happened everything else went down this
one went up okay well it's interesting
let's look at that so it turns out that
that was for artworks in the category
but was from the Sahel and then look so
looking at the different ethnicities of
those of those artworks it turns out
that artworks for Molly were what looked
like they were responsible for that
spike so this type of analysis you know
using technology to enable it can I can
give us a sense of what parts of the
world are at risk of looting perhaps I
mean it's not going to definitively
predict it but it's but it's one one way
of looking at it okay so now I'm moving
on to the political science or Foreign
Relations aspect of how that you know
what sort of quantitative analysis we
can do there I mentioned one of the
conventions which is the 1964 hey
convention and and there's there's a
slew of other conventions as you can see
here that have been you know ever since
the mid 1800s there have been all sorts
of efforts to protect cultural harwich
during armed conflict and during
peacetime such as the UNESCO convention
in 1972 to prevent the illicit transfer
of cultural property so why does it make
sense to look at these conventions
because it makes sense to look at which
nations are becoming States Parties so
the graph on the top gives you a sense
of participation varies across nations
some nations have participated in all
the conventions some of some of them in
only a few of them and then starting to
look at this more graphically you can
see
this is this isn't it so there's been
pretty good participation in the 94 hey
convention over 120 nations similarly
for the first and second protocols to
that convention and now looking at
conventions that have to do with
protection of cultural property not
necessarily related to armed conflict
that would be the 1970s convection and
the 1995 you nevah convention and the
these have to do with not only
preventing meals to transfer but also
providing a meet a mechanism for or the
means by which a nation can can
challenge the possession and achieve
retrieval of the of the artifacts
looking at these in combination is
interesting so which countries have have
become states party to some and not to
other and and for example Afghanistan
stands out here as having as having a
take it participated in in the
conventions to protect you listed
transfer of cultural property but not
necessarily the protection during during
armed conflict this is an Indian index I
came up that quantifies the partition
participation of any one nation in these
conventions both looking at how many
they have become a state party to and
how quickly they became a story stay
party after the convention was
established and so these lines basically
the more quickly align goes up from left
to right the stronger their
participation so you can see there's
some variation in these United States is
represented by the dark blue line on the
bottom so there and that was in part due
to their very sort of prolonged becoming
a state party to the 1954 hey convention
which was established in 1954 the United
States became a States party in 2009 you
looking at different regions of the
world gives you a sense of how of how of
how actively nations are involved in in
in the protection of cultural heritage
during armed conflict and again the
reason that's interesting it's because
it shows a crossover between art and
and in politics bilateral treaties are
another way in which artists become more
integrated into foreign relations these
dots on on the right there they show you
that the year in which a bilateral
treaty was established between the
United States and another nation these
are some of the nation's with which
whoops excuse me with which the United
States has has foreign bilateral
agreements I think there's there's over
30 nations at this point and then and
this shows you across time women when
the bilateral treaties were established
the dots between 2000-2005 that that
suggests that maybe it's interesting to
look at what's going on there that
happened to the year as I mentioned
earlier a word were prominent cultural
institutions United States were being
challenged for their possession of
foreign cultural heritage all right so
and then and then lastly I said a moment
ago it's very challenging to know what's
happening with the illicit trade and
antiquities and it's and it it's
difficult to get comprehensive numbers
on the list trade such as it is so I've
after looking at this think about all
this for about 15 years i decided to
figure out what is it that we can
measure and so my most recent project is
looking at repatriation cases so these
are cases in which one nation will
challenge the possession or ownership of
a cultural out of fact that's in another
nation whether it's in a museum or
private collection and make a case for
the return of that artifact to the
nation of origin and so the red lines
represent the red line represents the
number of cases that are that are
initiated within a particular year so it
this at least from the data collected so
far there's a pretty strong indication
that there's there's an increasing
interest in in initiating these cases
they're also being resolved as
represented by the green line so that
the number of K unresolved cases in any
one year is is hovering at about 100
this is simply the data I've collected
so far
another way of looking at it is how long
does it take for a case to be resolved
and this very complicated looking graph
is basically saying as time goes on the
amount of time required to resolve a
case is decreasing so the blue dots
become more clustered on the lower part
of the graph to the right it's an
indication that cases that were formed
more recently are taking less time to
resolve again that might suggest that
there's there's more attention being
paid to this from a political standpoint
you know there was a case that was
initiated in in the 1970s might have
taken 35 years to resolve and and the
machinery perhaps just wasn't there to
see the case through perhaps there
wasn't enough interest in doing it but
that clearly that that's changed over
time so what are the nation's they're
doing other that are that are asking for
or that are initiating cases for
repatriation these are just some of the
nation's that that reach the threshold
of at least four cases and then looking
at some of the other information that's
collected in the process of recording
the cases under which circumstances did
the artifact leave the the nation and
then in combination with other so-called
metadata you can start to look at some
interesting trends that may be occurring
so I'm going to wrap this up with with a
little bit about neuro aesthetics so I
has anyone actually heard the term neuro
aesthetics all right so I became
interested this when I was interested in
this when I was finishing my graduate
work in in visual neuroscience and I was
already feeling a need to take a break
from the sciences so I started thinking
about okay well what konerko science
tell us about art and I found out that I
realized that there were already been
some very interesting work that had been
done on this by professor by the name is
Samir Zeki at University College London
and he very elegantly shows how how
experiments in neuroscience particularly
visual neurosci
and have have verified the genius of
artists in understanding how the brain
works so it's a brutally briefly i'll
try to explain that what i mean by that
so for example an artistic technique
such as representing a third dimension
on a two-dimensional canvas is very much
akin to the challenges that the you and
i have when we try to perceive depth
because all the information that work
that comes into our eyes is compressed
onto a two-dimensional retina and then
somehow our brain needs to extract
reacts tracked the third dimension from
that well the the artist of the
Renaissance and perhaps part of that
they the techniques of a obscuring one
part of the image from another
foreshortening and perspective are in
fact exactly the cues that the brain
uses or I should say that the the branch
of visual neuroscience called
psychophysics discovered that those are
in fact the exact cues that the brain
uses to reconstruct a third dimension
chiaroscuro is an example of artists
understanding the how well the brain is
specialized to identify contrast so so
by by looking at the the effects of
light and shadow and how that how
effectively that works in a painting
well it turns out that our their visual
system is highly developed to to
identify the very smallest changes in
contrast the Impressionists recognized
that the information entering our eyes
is not cleanly is not it's not clean
such as it is in our perception it's
actually quite chaotic Cubist's were
probing the question of what by looking
at an image can we in fact see all sides
of it and this is something that our
brain does very well we can imagine what
an object looks like around all sides
not just decide that we're looking at so
kinetic artists strove to understand the
aesthetic
of motion itself neuroscientist
subsequently identified that that as as
information enters your eye and before
it's before perception is formed there
are actually discrete parts of the brain
that are specialized to identify color
form in motion a simile the color form
artists try to distinguish color from
from shape and then more recently
contemporary artists are looking at
perhaps more visceral responses to art
I'm separating art from any sort of
knowledge or cultural background getting
at the fundamentals of vision you know
perhaps playing on our emotions and with
that I'm probably way over my time limit
so thank you
[Applause]